# nft.storage should try w3up for web3 storage of new uploads

Authors
- bengo@protocol.ai

## Problem Statement

nft.storage needs to offer web3 storage and currently does so using a homegrown solution that may be expensive to operate, maintain, and scale.

Meanwhile the https://web3.storage team has productized a scalable web3 storage solution (named [w3up](https://github.com/web3-storage/w3up/)), and we think we may be able to deliver the same functionality that nft.storage needs for cheaper than it costs nft.storage to operate and improve the homegrown solution they use today that relies on [dagcargo](https://github.com/nftstorage/dagcargo).

But it's not clear how much it would cost for nft.storage to adopt web3.storage and interoperate with w3up.

If we lower the cost of adoption enough, perhaps nft.storage would be happy to ship the integration and use w3up/web3.storage as their storage/ipfs-serving/filecoin-dealmaking partner for the foreseeable future.

If we scout out the integration a bit, in the best case we'll enable short-term adoption of the product and, no matter what, we'll learn more about how usable our tools are in this real-world integration style, and we can use that to inform product improvements that hopefully help adoption of web3.storage in medium term.

## Goals

* enable nft.storage to store new uploads using web3.storage
* enable nft.storage to migrate to web3.storage, have an account there we have in our CRM, access console.web3.storage, etc

## Non-Goals

* migrate old nft.storage uploads
* fully remove reliance on dagcargo
  * however, this work may serve as useful input to that. If nft.storage can upload using w3up, filecoin aggregation will happen via [w3-filecoin](https://github.com/web3-storage/specs/blob/main/w3-filecoin.md). And if we have that, it reduces reliance on dagcargo.
* anything about nft.storage read and filecoin info APIs. We only need to decide that if/when we have nft.storage uploads going through web3.storage and into filecoin deals. This decision is just to ensure we can get to that point.
* changing how nft.storage UI does uploads. e.g. it's a non-goal to have nft.storage UI upload things in a different way than it does now, which appears to be handling a POST /uploads/ http request with the file in the request body. (iiuc it looks like request body is a CAR)

## Proposed Solution

### convert nft.storage infra to use w3up-client as a normal customer of w3up

>  convert NFT storage infra to use w3up client to act as a normal customer of w3up and go through normal flow to add the data into w3up. 

https://github.com/w3s-project/project-tracking/issues/7

Rationale
* "Then all existing filecoin pipeline stuff just happens by default"
* enables proving that web3.storage's w3-filecoin service can be a long-term replacement of dagcargo for nft.storage filecoin dealmaking
* lowers cost of adoption of web3.storage by nft.storage by proving out the integration incrementally

#### Architectural Changes

* when nft.storage api handles request POST /upload/ (e.g. from the nft.storage ui), the uploaded file should be stored using up.web3.storage in a space associated with an web3.storage account controlled by an administrator of nft.storage
    * initially, this will only happen when a feature switch is enabled

#### Data Model Changes

Minimal. Only new configuration.

We'll need to decide which storage space that uploads will be added to.
To start, we'll just making everything store in a configured storage space, and the app will read that from configuration passed in environment variables, similar to env vars in [add-to-web3](https://github.com/web3-storage/add-to-web3?tab=readme-ov-file#generating-a-secret_key-and-proof).

##### `W3_NFTSTORAGE_SPACE` Environment Variable

configures the web3.storage space that nfts will be stored in.

Example: `did:key:z6MkfbsERaJ7rtJQWMWtYMxNED56bhQMgrNu8CRdUjB5LfRp`

##### `W3_NFTSTORAGE_PRINCIPAL` Environment Variable

configures how nft.storage will authenticate to web3.storage when sending invocations to store things. e.g. it may contain an ed25519 keypair as a CID with raw multihash.

##### `W3_NFTSTORAGE_PROOF` Environment Variable

configures the capabilities that nft.storage has access to when interacting with web3.storage to store nfts. These capabilities will usually be UCAN delegations whose audience is the identifier of `W3_NFTSTORAGE_PRINCIPAL`.
W3_NFTSTORAGE_PROOF needs to have proof rooted in W3_NFTSTORAGE_SPACE that authorize W3_NFTSTORAGE_PRINCIPAL to store in W3_NFTSTORAGE_SPACE.

##### `NFTSTORAGE_W3S_ALLOW_ACCOUNTS` Environment Variable

configures feature switch for which nftstorage accounts will have new uploads stored in web3.storage.

Format: JSON Array of Account Identifiers

#### UI Changes

None. But the existing UI workflow of uploading via https://nft.storage/files/ and form should behave just like they do now. But after this change, there should be a new side effect, which is that the upload should appear in the listing of uploads for the configured `W3_NFTSTORAGE_SPACE` (e.g. via w3cli `w3 ls` or in console.web3.storage).

## Risks

### degrading nft.storage's existing functionality

We wouldn't want these changes to have any negative impact on users that rely on nft.storage's current setup. We only want to enable evaluation of new ways of delivering on that functionality that are seamless for end-users.

#### Mitigation: feature switch for initial rollout

We'll deploy this functionality to use web3.storage initially behind an opt-in feature switch. Once deployed, most uploads will not use the web3.storage functionality. Only accounts we add to a configured allow-list will get persisted to w3up. This removes risk of everyday users being impacted by bugs in the new code, while still enabling employees we allowlist to test the code in production. After testing in production, we can add more to the allowlist (e.g. perhaps nft.storage employees), or we can remove the feature switch to roll out the functionality for all users of nft.storage.

### Are there any backwards-incompatible changes?

No

### Does this project have special implications for security and data privacy?

Some minor implications.
After these changes, uploads will be shared with web3.storage in a new way. However, my understanding is that nft.storage is for public data, and this data is already shared with web3.storage through other means for the purpose of storage/serving on ipfs/filecoin. So there are no new data sharing concerns.

### Could this change significantly increase load on any of our backend systems?

Unlikely. As I understand it, the status quo for file uploads on nft.storage is that it is sent the full file in an http request, and then must store it. There may be a more work to do in some cases to store it (encoding/signing/invoking web3.storage), but this shouldn't be a **significant** increase in load. In the worst case, it may be 100% more cpu used for each file uploads, but we can mitigate the rollout of that via feature switch, and based on testing we can find ways of optimizing it.

### Does this project have any dependencies?

#### dependency on collaboration with nft.storage

This project can't succeed without a sponsor from nft.storage and willingness to try out the proposed changes to the nft.storage codebase in a production-like environment. If we have this, we can help prove out nft.storage storing data via web3.storage and relying on web3.storage productized services for serving on ipfs and filecoin dealmaking.

## Alternative Solutions

I don't know of any alternate solutions I can link to that provide a path to servicing nft.storage's web3 storage needs without relying on dagcargo. If you know of some, please add them here.

## Implementation and Rollout Plan

Prototype Happy path
* [ ] nft.storage/api: add feature switch requiring allowlist for new uploads to store in web3.storage
* [ ] nft.storage/api: modify POST /upload/ handler to store using w3up-client@12

Rollout
* [ ] release modified nft.storage to staging (production ok too) but with web3.storage disabled-by-default via feature switch
* [ ] configure web3.storage feature switch to be enabled on staging for a testing account
* [ ] test on nft.storage staging. make sure uploading a file via staging.nft.storage ui results in the file being stored in a web3.storage space

Repeat
* Observe
    * do we have engagement from nft.storage on this being viable? e.g. do we have them set up with a web3.storage account, payment method, etc? Does our hypothesis still make sense that by developing this, we're increasing chance of them becoming a paying customer of web3.storage?
    * what comes up from demoing this to rest of team?
* Orient
    * What is the web3.storage account and space that nft.storage wants to use in production?
* Decide
    * should we roll back the change based on new information?
    * do we have what we need to configure nft.storage production to write into a web3.storage space payed for by nft.storage designee?
    * should we enable feature switch in prod allowlisting a known testing account?
    * If everything is looking promising about uploads going through web3.storage. Should we figure out:
      > NFT storage read and filecoin info API's need to work against both w3up and legacy systems (and know which to use in each case)
    
      from https://github.com/w3s-project/project-tracking/issues/7      
* Act
    * P1: configure nft.storage production with a web3.storage space paid for by nft.storage
      * If blocked:
        * design/implement integration with nft.storage filecoin info apis
